Artificial Intelligence (AI)     Chatbot   as Language Learning Medium: An inquiry 
Abstract. In  facing  industry  revolution  4.0,  utilizing  advanced  information  and  computer technology  in  educational  environment  is  crucial.  One  of  the  advanced  computation technologies that can be used for learning, especially language learning, is chatbot . Chatbot  is a computer program based on artificial  intelligence  that can carry out conversations through 
audio or text. This study intends to find out and analyze the types of artificial intelligence in the form of chatbots  and the possibility of their use as language learning medium. The data in this study obtained from literature review on chatbot  researches, and from observation results on chatbot -based language learning medium developed by the author. The results indicated that chatbots   have  a  high  potential  to  be  used  as  a  language  learning  medium,  both  as  tutor  in practicing language, and as independent learning medium. Moreover, research results revealed that language learners are interested in using chatbots  because they can be used anytime and anywhere, and they are more confident in learning languages using chatbots  than when dealing directly with human tutors. 

1.  Introduction 
The industrial revolution 4.0 has an impact on the urgency of education field to be able to keep up with  these  developments,  which  later  brought  the  term  Education  4.0  [1,  2,  3].  In  embodying Education 4.0, one of the most required ability from educators and educational practitioners is to be able  to  integrate  modern  technology  in  their  teaching  [3].  The  rapid  development  of  smart  phone technology,  social  media,  and  artificial  intelligence  (AI),  provide  challenges  for  educational practitioners  to  utilize  these  technologies  in  developing  advance  learning  media.  In  latest  decades, artificial intelligence utilization to develop applications is massively conducted, and its products used in  almost  every  aspects  of  our  life.  This  type  of  communication  which  occurs  through  digital technology rather than in person is called computer-mediated communication (CMC) [4]. CMC forms including  instant  messaging,  email,  chat  rooms,  online  forums,  social  networks,  and chatbot   or chatterbot   [5,  6]. Chatbot   is  a  computer  program  or  artificial  intelligence  which  carries  out conversations  through  audio  or  text  [7],  and  interact  with  users  in  a  particular  domain  or  topic  by giving  intelligent  responses  in  natural  language  [8,  9]. Chatbot   for  general  purposes  and  for educational purposes have been developed [4,10,11]. However, despite chatbots ’ unlimited possibility to  enhance  language  teaching  and  learning,  the  concept  of chatbot   including  its  advantages  as language learning medium is not yet widely known. Therefore, the purpose of this study is to analyze the types of artificial intelligence in the form of chatbots  and the possibility of their use as language learning medium. This study also aims to observe a chatbot  constructed as Japanese language learning medium developed by the author and team, and reports its’ results as an inquiry to find out further about the possibility of chatbot  to enhance language learning and teaching.  

2.  Method 
This study is a descriptive method study. The data collection in this study conducted through literature reviews on previous researches about chatbot  and its’ use. Literature reviews performed to identify the type of chatbots, especially those developed for educational purposes including language learning, as well as to identify their advantages/disadvantages in language teaching and learning. This study also include a report on observation results on chatbot -based language learning medium developed by the author and team, namely Gengobot . 

3.  Findings and Discussion  
The  basic  mechanism  of chatbot   begins  with  the  message  sent  by  the  user.  The  message  then processed by NLP (Natural Language Processing), and chatbot  responded by replying to the message according  to  the  existing  database  (see  figure  1). For  example,  when  a  user  sent  "how  are  you?" message, chatbot  will look for answers that match this question in the database such as “I am fine”, “Great!” etc. 

3.1.  The types of Chatbot 
The type  of chatbot  found  in  this study  can  be  categorized  into three types  based  on  its’  structure, 
purpose, and audience. The sub-categories and their functions is concluded in table 1. 
 
                                  Table 1 . Types of chatbot . 
 Category   Sub -category                               Function  
 Structure  Flow chatbot   A  tree-based chatbot . This chatbot   has  fixed  responds  set  by  the  developer, 
                           and only responds to questions that are already in the database. Flow chatbots 
                           include buttons, keywords, and catchphrases instead of  free  writing to drive 
                           the client down the predefined path.  
            Artificially   Chatbot with artificial intelligence has the ability update their knowledge and 
            intelligent    perception  from  previous  conversations  and  users’  experience,  letting  the 
                           users engage more freely.  
            Hybrid         This  type  of  chatbot  combines  the  concepts  of  Flow  and  AI  chatbots.  This 
                           chatbot  can  understand  and  communicate  with  users, but  remains  in  the 
                           pattern determined by the developer.  
 Purpose    Functionality  This chatbots have certain functions depends on the developer (i.e. chatbot for 
                           learning, personal assistant, reminder, online shop assistant, etc.)  
            Fun            Chatbot that intended only for entertainment (i.e. games, funbot , etc.).  
 Audience   Generalist     This  chatbot  has  general  knowledge  that we  can  ask  directly.  I.e.  Siri 
                           developed by Apple ,and Cortana developed by Microsoft. Both Chatbots can 
                           help us solve common problems such as searching  for restaurants, locations 
                           and more.  
            Specialist     This chatbot focus on one constrained thing and do that one thing  extremely 
                           well  (i.e. chatbots that used t o serve customers online when ordering items).  

Table 1 shows that chatbot  has several categories and can be developed according to the developer’s necessity.  However, chatbots   that  are  developed  for  educational  purposes  tend  to  use  artificially intelligence structure. Artificially intelligent chatbot  for general purpose such as MILABOT has also been  developed  [10].  MILABOT  is  a  deep  reinforcement  learning  chatbot  which  capable  of conversing  with  humans  on  popular  small  talk  topics  through  both  speech  and  text.  The  system consists of an ensemble of natural language generation and retrieval models, including template-based models,  bag-of-words  models,  sequence-to-sequence  neural  network  and  latent  variable  neural network  models  [10]. Chatbots   that  developed  for  educational  purposes,  especially  for  language learning, are described further in the following sub-section. 

3.2.  Chatbot in Language Learning and Teaching 
Chatbots  development  to  utilize  learning  and  teaching  have been  conducted. Freudbot   has  been developed for psychology students to find out about student-content interaction in distance education. The  results  shows  that  the  basic  analysis  of  the  chatlogs  indicated  a  high  proportion  of  on-task behavior.  The  findings  also  suggests  that chatbot   technology  may  be  promising  as  a  teaching  and learning tool in distance and online education [12]. Chatbot  use is also compared with humanoid robot in science lecture class, and reported that the visualization using chatbot  was helpful for students to understand  the  lecture  smoothly  [13].  However,  researches  on chatbot   use  and  development  to enhance  language  learning  rather  difficult  to  find.  This  study  identified  researches  on  language teaching and learning as seen in table 2. 
 
                   Table 2. Chatbot researches on language learning.  
First author 
            Chatbot name  Subject       Focus        Sample   Research type 
   (year)  
Jia (2004)       -        English, Application of a Web- 1256  Experiment  
                         Germany  based Chatbot system 
                         as Foreign on foreign language  
                         Language teaching 
                                   
Fryer (2006)  Cleverbot  English as Chatbot as English 211   Experiment & 
                          Foreign language learning tools    survey  
                         Language 
                             
Jia (2009)  CSIEC chatbot   English A computer assisted 1783 Experiment, survey 
                         Learning English learning chatbot   & questionnaire 
                                  based on textual 
                                  knowledge and 
                                  reasoning 
                                   
Goda (2014)   Cleverbot  English as The use of Chatbot 130   Comparison based 
                          Foreign before online EFL          (Experimental & 
                         Language discussion and The         Control group) 
                                  effect on critical 
                                  thinking 
                                   
Fryer (2017)  Cleverbot  English as Comparison of chatbot 122  Comparison based 
                          Foreign and human task partners    (Pre-test & Post-
                         Language  in English learning       test)  
 
Table  2  shows  that chatbot   researches  were  mainly  found  in  English  language  learning [14,15,16,17,18]. Research reported that the dialogs using chatbot  are mostly very short because the users find the computer is much less intelligent as a human, since the responses from the computer are often repeated and irrelevant with the topics and the context. However, the results also indicates that many participants are very interested in using chatbot  as chatting partner in speaking foreign language, since  it  is  accessible  anywhere  and  anytime,  while it  is  not  easy  to  find  native  speakers  as  human chatting  partner.  The  learners  also  more  confident communicating  with chatbot   which  is  obviously less intelligent as the human themselves. It would be pedagogically attractive for the learner to chat with  a  system  of  artificial  intelligence  which  could  “really”  understand  the  natural  language  and communicatively generate the natural language to form a human-like dialog [14].  Further, the main chatbot  used in language learning researches as seen in Table 2 is Cleverbot , which developed by British AI scientist Rollo Carpenter in 1986 and went online on 1997. The results of researches  of  using Cleverbot   reported  that  most  students  enjoyed  using  this chatbot [15,17].  They also  generally  felt  more  comfortable  conversing  with  the  bots  than  a  student  partner  or  teacher. However,  the  results  also  suggest  that chatbots   are  generally  only  useful  for  advanced  and/or  very keen  language  students.  Language  teachers  also  need  to  get  involved  and  bring chatbot   technology into the foreign language learning classroom as a permanent tool for language practice [15] . Research reported that preceding conversation before classroom discussion with a chatbot  lead to an increase in the number of contributions that students made to discussion [17]. Moreover, pre-discussion with a chatbot   also  could  increase  the  students’  awareness  of  critical  thinking  and  enable  them  to  form inquiring mindsets [17]. However, the result of comparisons in speaking task with chatbot  and human partner indicated a significant drop in students' task interest with chatbot , but not human partner. The reason  of  drop  in  task  interest  with  chatbot  was  caused  by  novelty  effect  [18].  On  the  other  hand, CSIEC chatbot reported successfully helped students with course unit review, make the students more confident, and improved students’ listening ability, as well as enhanced students’ interest in language learning.  The  comparison  of  examination  results  before  and  after  the  using chatbot   showed  great improvement of students’ performance [15]. From above results, it is understood that the use of chatbot  gave many advantages in language learning and  teaching,  as  in  enhancing  classroom  motivation and  learning  [15,19].  However,  chatbot  also reported  to  have  flaws  comparing  to  human  partner, especially  in  the  novelty  aspect  [18].  Several researches and chatbot  development for English language learning have been conducted, but chatbot  development and researches in other languages teaching and learning is still difficult to find. As an attempt to answer this challenge, the author and team tried to develop a chatbot -based multi-language grammar application, namely Gengobot , which will be introduced further in the next sub-section. 

3.3.  Gengobot as Japanese Language Learning Medium 
Gengobot  is a chatbot -based dictionary application about multi-language grammar developed by the author, using CodeIgniter (CI) framework. CI is a PHP framework that can be used to develop PHP-based website application without the necessity to write all the code from the beginning. CI framework was chosen because it is an opensource framework and free to modify, smaller than other framework, and  uses  MVC  (Model-View-Controller)  concept  that  functioned  in  programming  process  to  call needed  databases  easily.  The  main  purpose  of Gengobot   development  is  to  provide  a  Japanese grammar learning medium for beginner level of Japanese language learners. However, to broaden its’ use, the application also equipped with grammar contents in English and Indonesian, and integrated with social media LINE. LINE official account has Messaging API feature that allows an account to run chatbot  that has been created (see figure 2). The database system used in Gengobot  is MySQL (see figure 3 and  figure 4). MySQL was chosen because it is free licensed, and the database structure used in MySQL is in table form which is flexible and easy to use. The database created for this chatbot including:  (1)  Database  of  user  data  storage,  including  name,  language,  training  score,  etc.;  (2) Grammar  database  in  three  languages;  (2)  Questions database  and  their  answer  (for  ‘Exercise’ feature). 
 
Gengobot  consists of fixed responds including buttons, keywords, and catchphrases set as database. The buttons includes several menus as ‘Menu’, ‘Help’, ‘Language’, and ‘Contact’ option as shown in figure  5,  as  well  as  several  sub-menus  that  developed  under  each  menu.  From  observation  and evaluation results, Gengobot  was successfully developed as a language learning medium, especially to support  students’  learning  about  Japanese  grammar  with  description  available  in  English  and Indonesian. Gengobot  also considered user friendly since it could be accessed through social media LINE. The features in Gengobot  also includes ‘Exercise’, so the students not only able to learn about Japanese grammars, but also able to test their knowledge about grammars they have learned. However, Gengobot  is a flow chatbot , so the interaction between users/students and chatbot  still very limited to the  inputted  database.  Although  as  grammar  learning  application  it  is  still  considered  sufficient,  to improve  its’  use  for  enhancing  language  learning,  as  well  as  other  language  skills  teaching  and learning, Gengobot  still need to be developed further in its’ technology and features. 

4.  Conclusion 
This study aimed to analyze the types of chatbots  and the possibility of their use as language learning medium.  From  the  results,  it  is  known  that chatbot   can  be  categorized  into  three  types,  and  has advantages  and  disadvantages.  As  the  advantages, chatbot   is  reported  can  help  language  learners through six ways: (1) students tend to feel more relaxed talking to a computer than to a person; (2) chatbots  are willing to repeat the same material with students endlessly; (3) many bots  provide both text and synthesized speech, allowing students to practice both listening and reading skills; (4) Bots  are  new  and  interesting  to  students;  (5)  students  have  an  opportunity  to  use  a  variety  of  language structures  and  vocabulary  that  they  ordinarily  would  not  have  a  chance  to  use;  (6) chatbots   could potentially provide quick and effective feedback for students’ spelling and grammar [15]. However, chatbot  also reported to have a flaw on its novelty aspects and need to be improved. This study also observed  a chatbot-based  Japanese  language  learning  medium  developed  by  the  author,  namely Gengobot . As the results,  Gengobot  have a high potential to be used as a Japanese language learning medium  especially  in  learning  grammar,  yet  need  to be  developed  further  in  its’  technology  and features. 
